Hello, good evening, and welcome. I'm
Susan Engel. I have the privilege of
being the executive producer of 92Y
Talks, and I'm delighted to see so many
of you with us for our very special
evening.
We are deeply honored to co-present
tonight's high-level discussion on the
search for immortality
with the Institute for
Cross-Disciplinary Engagement at
Dartmouth.
The Institute and its generous support
through the Templeton Foundation have
allowed us to bring you this evening the
best of the best for an important
conversation that promises to open our
minds and expand our thinking.
As a community center, your
participation is important to us, and I
invite you to submit your questions on
the cards that the ushers have handed
out. They will be collected midway
through our program.
I'm now thrilled to welcome back to this
stage our moderator and the driving
force behind tonight's event.
Marcelo Gleiser is the Appleton
Professor of natural philosophy and
professor of physics and astronomy at
Dartmouth.
He is also the author of over 100
scientific papers, countless essays, and
five books.
He is the director of the Institute for
Cross-Disciplinary Engagement at
Dartmouth.
As a world-renowned physicist with an
uncanny ability to explain complex terms
in ways we all can understand, he is a
frequent presence in science and
religion documentaries in the US and
abroad, and the co-founder and
contributed to contributor of the
National Public Radio blog 13.7
on science and culture and how it
intersects.
Um before he frames our discussion and
joins us, I would like you to watch this
brief video about the institute. Thank
you.
The world is a complex place, a network
of flowing information and changing
patterns, where forces known and unknown
generate the most sublime beauty and the
most terrifying destruction.
The world inspires wonder and doubt, and
we humans try to make sense of it all,
creating stories, theories, symphonies,
and poems.
I'm Marcelo Gleiser, director of the
Institute for Cross-Disciplinary
Engagement at Dartmouth, or ICE.
On behalf of all of us at ICE and our
partners, I invite you to be a part of
our institute, to be a part of this very
essential conversation.
What is the nature of reality?
What is the future of humanity? Will
machines think?
Will and should we become immortal? Is
there free will?
Are we alone in the universe?
Can science be a path towards
spirituality?
ICE was created to address these issues
and establish new bridges between
different ways of knowing.
Our mission is to overcome old bigotries
and facilitate a constructive dialogue
between intellectuals and the general
public, creating a community of citizens
concerned with the common good, engaging
experts, promoting public dialogue, and
offering open access courses. One thing
is certain, the hardest questions ask
for different viewpoints, for a
cross-disciplinary approach, for
intellectual openness.
The sciences and the humanities need one
another now more than ever, and we need
them both.
Hello everyone.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you so much for being here.
I bet there are repeaters.
Um, so this is our third engagement here
at the 92nd Street Y. If you're at 2
years ago, we started this with a night
on this nature of consciousness with
Antonio Damasio and David Chalmers. Last
year, we had one on the nature of faith
with uh Rebecca Goldstein and Alan
Lightman. And tonight, we have something
on immortality and or mortality because
obviously you can't think of one without
the other.
So, in order to do that, I thought that
would be very interesting to have a
conversation on the different scales in
which we can think about the problem,
right? So, we can of course think about
about it from a human scale. Now, we are
all animals that uh have this very
perplexing dilemma that we are
self-aware and that we know that our
life in this planet is of a limited
time.
And so, we have this combination, you
know, I can say like this uh
superposition of two tendencies which
tend to be quite different, which is on
the one hand we are animals, you know,
we have hair and nails that grow, we
reproduce like mammals most mammals do.
And yet we can conceive of the infinite,
we can think about transcendence, we can
think about change and transformation,
and we know who we are. At least we know
we are alive and we have an
understanding of what that means, right?
So in 1973,
um the cultural anthropologist Ernest
Becker wrote a book which won a Nobel
Prize uh the excuse me, the Pulitzer
Prize in uh 1974 called The Denial of
Death.
And in this book he explores precisely
this issue, right? How do we find
meaning
knowing that we have these two extremes
pulling us somewhat apart, you know, the
animal nature, the demigod kind of
nature, right? And it's a very
complicated conversation. And at about
the same time in the 1970s, the first
models of climate change were being
developed.
And the realization that there was a
human impact on the weather was becoming
more and more obvious to those who are
studying this.
So you can think of mortality or the
extension of life, immortality, from a
human scale to a planetary scale. And
tonight I am incredibly proud to have
two leading thinkers on these topics.
Siddhartha Mukherjee and Elizabeth
Kolbert.
So let me introduce them and they'll
join me here on stage. So the way the
night goes is essentially like this. So
each one of them will talk for about 15
or 20 minutes.
Then we will talk among amongst each
other, you know, I'll ask them
questions, they may have questions to
one another for another 15 or 20
minutes. Then we're going to open for
Q&A from you. Okay? And there is a
procedure for that. I think uh you have
cards uh something like that that you
write on. I don't know exactly the
details.
And then we are going to address your
questions. And then after that, we have
a second part to the evening, which are
more informal. Basically, we go back
stage and not back this way, but back
that way into a room where there'll be
some drinks as far as I understand. And
there will be an there will be an
opportunity for us and for you to talk
at a different kind of level, not from
stage to audience, but from the same
kind of level. Be sitting next to you
and we can have this conversation
together. If you have other questions
that weren't addressed during the
official time, so to speak.
Now, let me ask you something. You
hopefully got a survey
as you came in. And to us, because this
is a grant-based program, right? We I
got this grant to promote this
connection between the humanities and
the sciences from the Templeton
Foundation, I need to show them that
people care by answering the survey. So,
please, if you want this to happen and
keep happening again, hopefully next
year again here for our fourth year,
please do fill the survey and somebody
will be collecting that
on the outside. All right. So, without
much ado,
let me introduce our two speakers. So,
Elizabeth Kolbert has been a staff
writer at The New Yorker since 1999.
Her three-part series on global warming,
The Climate of Man, won the 2006
National Magazine Award for public
interest among other honors. She
received a Lannan Literary Fellowship in
2006 and a Heinz Award in 2010
and won the 2010 National Magazine Award
for Reviews and Criticism.
She is the author of The Prophet of Love
and Other Tales of Power and Deceit,
Field Notes from a Catastrophe, which is
now available in paperback, and finally
The Sixth Extinction, for which she won
the 2015 Pulitzer Prize for general
non-fiction. So, everybody, please
welcome Elizabeth to stage. Elizabeth.
Thank you.
So, you
Well, I think all the way to the other
side.
Yeah. Yeah.
And then I have Siddhartha Mukherjee,
who is a pioneering physician,
oncologist, and author.
A very influential voice in the
scientific community. He's best known
for his books, The Emperor of All
Maladies, A Biography of Cancer, which
earned him the 2011 Pulitzer Prize, and
The Gene, An Intimate History, which was
recognized by the Washington Post and
The New York Times as one of the most
influential books of 2016.
The Emperor of All Maladies was adapted
into a documentary by Ken Burns and
included among Time's 100 best
non-fiction books of the past century.
So, Sid, please join us. Thank you.
Good.
Very good. So, we now
we're going to start and the first one
to speak will be Sid tonight. So, Sid,
take it on and
Well, thank you very much for uh
picking such a easy topic I know. to
start with. Small moderate topic. Um
I thought I would begin with um
a thought experiment. Um and the thought
experiment goes like this.
Um
If you were in the uh sitting in the
1850s,
um you and you ask the question, "What
is it like to get old?"
Uh what is it like to live beyond
50 years old?
Someone might say to you it's a horrible
life.
Your teeth fall out.
Your hair degenerates, your skin
degenerates. It's a terrible thing, and
what we should really do is respect
human boundaries and dignity
and let people die quietly at 50.
Um
it fast forward a few years, and all of
a sudden those realities, your skin
degenerating, your hair degenerating,
your body, your mind falling apart,
starts to change because all of a sudden
we begin to make important advances,
scientific advances, cultural advances,
advances in public health hygiene, when
all of a sudden 50 isn't a boundary.
And that same person who told you, you
know, why not just give up at 50?
Terrible life out there.
Um would start saying, well, actually
now 60s sounds good.
And so on and so forth. 60s become 70s.
So, there are two strands
in
our understanding of longevity of the
body. One strand constantly reminding us
that
death and aging and
uh
the end is nothing but inevitable, and
that's of course true.
But on the other hand, another strand
pushing and saying, well, what's
inevitable about it? What is it about
certain organisms live much longer.
There's no, you know, what are the
biological limits? Well, the biological
limits are defined by what we want to
understand and how we want to push them.
So,
I think that there is as as a physician,
as an oncologist, as someone works in
cancer,
you feel both these strands.
And it's important to remember that the
two strands exist. Absolutely true. It's
absolutely true that there is a kind of
collapse of dignity when you begin to
say, you know, let's all live till till
100, and that changes and distorts
certain ways of thinking about culture.
But on the other hand, let's not forget
that as I said 100 years ago, people
would say living beyond 50 was a
horrible life.
So, with that
as a kind of background,
um
I thought I would propose to you,
three potential visions of longevity or
immortality, um
and they're quite different from each
other, and they have each one has a
very different consequence about how we
think about human future.
Um the first one
is the most traditional one.
And that's the one that we've grown up
with
in a kind of cultural sense.
And that's simple. It's It's It's
immortality viewed in the in the
negative or in the double negative. And
that's simply, if you killed all the
killers,
you would achieve
infinite longevity or at least
true longevity.
This is the stuff that I came into my
sort of professional life, my
scientific life.
Take diseases away.
Um remove uh cancer,
heart disease,
um and other other such diseases. Uh
infectious diseases in the last um
so-called
you know, if you look at the
If you look at human history, it's an
astonishing history in the last 100
years because um
the conquest of communicable diseases,
so-called infectious diseases, um
lengthened
uh human lives, human longevity, whether
that conquest was through public health
measures or or however we achieved them,
a mixture of things, mostly public
health and hygiene, some vaccination, of
course, some use of antibiotics
uh among among those things.
That changed the epidemiology of human
disease. We would all Most of us would
be dead in this in this audience. We
would be all long gone. Um uh 100 120
years uh odd years ago.
Uh
virtually none of us would be here,
actually.
Um
So, um
and then the
the the epidemiology, the face of human
disease began to shift
and become uh more and more focused on
these so-called non-communicable
diseases. So much so that it feels these
days that the division of the
world between non-communicable diseases
and communicable diseases,
infectious and non-infectious diseases,
is a little bit like saying mammals can
be divided into cows and non-cows.
Um that's because the category of
non-cows, non-communicable diseases,
heart disease, cancer, even in countries
that you wouldn't imagine
uh even in parts of the world where you
would think that the burden of
communicable diseases is enormous, the
pattern is shifting so dramatically um
that there's an expectation, for
instance, in a country like just to pick
one out of the hat, Tanzania, um more
people will die from hyp- the
complications of hypertension than they
will die of the complications of various
infectious diseases in 10 years. That's
one one kind of uh one kind of So, this
gives you sense of the changing nature
of epidemiology. So, but to go back to
the question, if you kill all the
killers, um if you remove the uh
uh constraints or the barriers to
long life, that you would actually in
increase human longevity uh enormously.
And of course, there's a truth to that.
But then came a second vision, which
began to appear, um and it comes from a
variety of sources.
Uh
and I'll name I'll talk about the
sources. It turns out that if you look
at people who have extreme longevity,
people who live
120 years, 118, 108, 110.
What's interesting about those people is
that they are not killed by killers.
They, in fact, are dying from diseases
that we don't think of as diseases. So,
they, for instance, die of peculiar
forms of bacterial sepsis. Their immune
system collapses.
Um
they sometimes die of broken bones.
My laboratory, actually, we study bone
for we found stem cells that make bones.
There's this project that we're doing
right now to try to find people with
extreme
longevity to ask the question, what
happens to stem cells in their bone? We
discovered these stem cells some years
ago. We're trying to put them in back
into human beings.
Um they make stem They make bone and
cartilage, among other things. Um so
um
So, the second idea is that, sure, you
can remove you can take away the
killers. You can kill the killers.
But, there may be changes that
prospectively, outside removing the
killers,
there may be genetic or biological,
epigenetic, or other changes that would
allow us to extend human longevity
without focusing on the killers. So, in
other words, there are genes
or diets or bionic mechanisms
by which you could alter your lifespan
in a positive way. So, imagine I would
find a a a gene in in in in a small
animal um that
um increases longevity enormously. Um
and such genes have been found.
Interestingly, many of them have to do
with the way we regulate metabolism. Um
many of them have to have a very careful
There's a very careful balance between
those genes and the capacity of of them
to tip into cancer.
Um and so um there's a very very tricky
balance, but occasionally you can find
genetic means
of changing
the limits of
human longevity. And one interesting
consequence that arises out of that is
to say, well, forget about killing all
the killers, maybe we should be
tampering with human genomes so that we
can increase longevity.
I would say we were talking about this a
little bit before in trans, which means
that they suppress all the other
effects. They would override any other
effects and it would be non-disease
specific. It's not as if you would they
would essentially override the effects
of of diseases.
And such do such genes exist? Yes, they
exist in other animals. They exist in
worms and in flies. You can make worms
that are three live three times longer
than other worms.
Um, often these genetic means cluster
along pathways, um, along
very particular ways. Often they cluster
around metabolic, uh, pathways. Um,
and you know, for a long time
you would imagine that these
alterations, unless all of a sudden
there appeared a genetic mutation, a
genetic variation in humans that would
spontaneously arise and that could give
that kind of longevity, you would
imagine it would be very hard to tamper
with this physiology. Um,
certainly you can tamper with the
physiology in other animals, worms as I
said before. Um,
and now one thing we'll talk a little
bit about with new genetic tools,
um, it's possible to tamper with the
human genome,
um, in principle. And when you do that,
again, remember you can do it in two
ways. You can remove
the natural you may you can remove
constrainers. Um, and we can we'll talk
a little bit about that.
But also you can um
change in a positive direction. You can
not just remove the constraints, you can
influence in a positive direction just
like in small animals. And here the
world splits into generally speaking two
kinds of camps.
Um one camp would suggest that
longevity and all these complex traits
um are so complicated
that there'll be
many many genes and possibly across so
that just to give you a sense of what
the scope of the problem is. If you
um were to take the human genome and you
were to
uh
print it out um in standard print format
um it would be about a single human
genome would be a 66 full volumes of the
Encyclopedia Britannica.
So um this room wall-to-wall up all over
would be
Elizabeth's genome.
Um
and
and in the past of course it was largely
inscrutable. So this is written in just
four letters. It would be if you opened
up one volume it would read ACTGCTT
TGCs That's not I'm making it up. I
didn't memorize the sequence but um
So
in the past
our capacity to read that information
was extraordinarily limited. Um
you could say on page
in volume
36 on page
um
I have a genetic sequence that encodes
for the cystic fibrosis gene. And if you
change this letter to that letter you
can go from a normal cystic fibrosis
gene to an abnormal one. And if you have
two copies of that and so forth and you
could make some conclusions about it.
So these were single genetic changes
which we could map on to
human traits, diseases, and so forth.
Now, um we are getting to a place where
we're actually beginning to read this
information with in a powerfully uh in a
powerful manner. This is I call this
reading. Um just to give you a sense of
how powerful that can be and how
disruptive um that can be. Um I just
read a paper
uh
2 weeks ago, still in preprint, uh
where they took um human height
as a characteristic. Um
Now, height's a very interesting
characteristic because we know it's
highly heritable. Tall parents tend to
have tall kids. Shorter parents tend to
have shorter kids. This was known for a
long time.
But for decades, people had been trying
to find so-called a gene for height,
single genes for height. And for most
human variation,
um they were very hard to find. Um and
we knew that they were probably um
tens of thousands of variations only
20,000 genes, but the lettering is very
wide. So, there were tens of thousands
of human variations that would explain
ultimately each with small effect
um that would explain height.
Um
the problem, of course, was that in
order to decipher that, you would have
to have uh
you have to create a compendium of all
human beings and all their heights, find
all their genome sequences, and try to
find a machine, a computer, or an
algorithm that would correlate one with
the other. And there was not
all of these resources didn't exist. But
it turns out now they do exist. And this
particular paper
um uses a a powerful computational
algorithm um to predict human height
from genetic information alone. Take
away malnutrition, that's a very
important constraint. This is assuming
no malnutrition, assuming no
environmental change, we'll come back to
that in a second, uh from human genetic
information alone.
Now, think about that for a second. That
means that in principle, you would be
able to predict the height of your
unborn fetus
before that child was ever born. You
would know what height they would
attain.
And now think about extending this
potentially to other
attributes. Um
color of hair, the color of your skin,
um and all of a sudden you've gone into
territory which I think all of us
would feel a little uncomfortable with.
Um longevity
uh rides along similar principles. We
don't have fundamental notions about it,
but it would be very, very clear that
the heritable part of longevity, the
part that can be inherited, um will
begin to be solved and in fact that's a
project going on right now. Um this is
the great one of the great biobank
projects of longevity. So,
then we will be able to read longevity.
And if there are genes which very
strongly influence longevity, or if
there are genes that very strongly
influence longevity in a negative
direction, we should we can potentially
change those.
Um there happens to be one already, a
big candidate,
uh a gene that increases your risk for
neurological syndromes, uh Alzheimer's
disease, neurodegenerative diseases,
called ApoE, um
and someone like George Church and
others um
have made a compelling argument, why not
take it away from the human genome? Uh
why not remove that? Why live with this
constraint if you don't have to live
with this constraint? So, that would be
the second vision of
of uh longevity longevity tipping into
far edges of mortality. It's not
immortality, but far edges.
And then the last one um is perhaps the
most intriguing one. I've been thinking
about this as a thought experiment for a
long time and wondering and I the
question that I posed myself
a while ago was
could there be a soft version of
immortality? Could we hack it?
And by that I mean
not inventing crazy new tools, but what
if someone gave me the toolkit of what's
available. Could I make a kind of soft
immortality possible?
And I began to think about the following
experiment,
thought experiment. Um
I'm going to write kind of a I'm going
to write more about it because I've been
thinking more and more about it. So,
let's say I I here's the thought
experiment. Let's say I um
let's say I used you, Elizabeth, as an
example.
Um
we are quite confident that we could
clone you. Um
So, um you can clone most mammals. Um
that It's not easy, but within limits, I
think the possibility of cloning is
becoming more and more more and more
clear. And if it's not cloning, we could
even do a soft version of cloning and we
would derive in which we would derive
sperm and eggs from your normal cells,
combine them, and basically recreate a
soft version of a clone.
Um
So, it wouldn't be the Dolly version of
the clone, which is more complicated in
which you have to take a another
nucleus, uh sorry, another cell out,
suck up the nucleus and reinject it with
your nucleus, thereby creating a clone.
We could do it a bunch of different
ways. You could recreate basically sperm
and eggs in principle from someone's
cells and then combine them again. So,
let's assume for a second that we would
be able to do the cloning piece of it.
And then here's the experiment, which is
that what what struck me was that the
cost of digital recording
of all your experiences um
is diminishing so dramatically that you
could basically wear a GoPro
um
and walk around. Um and you could edit
your GoPro. You could edit your GoPro as
you aged and you could say, "These
memories were really significant for me.
You know, that time I went to Rio and
sat on the beach, that moment I
experienced that glacier, etc." So, my
question was, "What if we began to clone
ourselves and then give our clones the
capacity"
and this is not even fancy technology.
I'm not talking about brain interfaces.
I'm just saying give them a GoPro. Give
them a quick GoPro lesson on your life.
Um in which they would absorb and
perhaps even experience
the what you thought were the
fundamentally important pieces of you.
So you would have yourself in a second
generation now absorbing pieces of you.
What's interesting about the experiment
is that it's infinitely repeatable. Your
clone makes a clone, gives a GoPro to
the clone, etc. etc. etc. And of course
information is lost.
It's not going to be your life.
But I just keep wondering about this
idea. It
haunts me a lot. I mean, what if I would
do that? Would it alleviate some
concerns that I have about my end? I
would end, but
you know, very important pieces of me
would be left over. A genetic copy would
be left over. A true genetic copy would
be left over. And, you know, things I
treasured, my my most important memories
would be here. So
anyway, it's dystopic, of course, but
you know, yesterday's dystopias are
tomorrow's
old news. So
um
there's there's a quality about this
that makes you think. I mean, this is a
thought experiment, but makes you think
about And then the question, of course,
will becomes well, what happens to human
population then? How do we
crisscross? So I'm going to stop there.
That's kind of a broad introduction, but
those were my three visions of of
longevity tipping into the edges of
immortality. That's great. Thank you
very much. And now we go for the macro
view. Yeah, speaking of um dystopia, um
So that was like a perfect right, a
perfect perfect um lead-in and I
um
am supposed to I guess represent the
humanities here. I'm up here with two
scientists and the humanities always are
you know, get the short end of the
stick, the bum end of the stick. Um and
so I'm going to I'm going to talk about,
you know, since he talked about
immortality, and I I'm going to I'm
going to really flip that around and I
think that there are there is a really
interesting conversation. It's not a
conversation, maybe it's a it's
something much worse than that. How's
that? We can a brawl. Um
And and that is I'm going to talk about
um what human
humans have meant to the rest, you know,
that that we don't really know how many
species um
exactly there are on the planet. The
rough estimates are about 10 million. Um
we have named maybe 1.5 million of them,
so there's a lot of life out there that
uh we sort of know from statistical
tools are out there, but we really don't
know what it is um still at this point
in 2018. Um but we know that we're you
know, destroying it uh pretty rapidly
and the um
The reasons for this, you know, I I have
a lot to do. They're the the the flip
side uh of our tremendous success at
staving off disease, at reproducing, at
feeding ourselves, uh all the things
that have brought us to the point where
we're there now 7.6
uh billion people on the planet hitting
very rapidly. Um you know, we'll hit
eight in the next couple uh couple of
years actually.
Um and if you want to know exactly, you
can go there's like a world population
clock and you can watch that thing spin
around by the you know, not just by the
one or two or three, but by the 10,000s,
you know, every every few minutes.
Um as as our population grows. So
um
What are the So I I I wrote you know, I
I wrote a this book about this idea that
we are causing uh
a mass extinction. So so what is a mass
extinction? A mass extinction is a is a
very simple concept. Um it's just
considered a a period of time, a short
period of time, relatively short on a
geological scale uh when a lot of the
diversity of the planet, for whatever
reason, crashes and um this idea that
there's a sixth extinction obviously
implies there've have five previous
ones. There have been, lo and behold,
the first
occurred 440 million years ago during a
period known as the Ordovician period
when when life was still largely
confined to the water. So, about 3/4 of
all marine species died out and very few
on land cuz there were very few on land.
And the
most familiar one of these mass
extinctions is the fifth,
um which did in the dinosaurs 66 million
years ago. And there's a pretty broad
scientific consensus now uh that that
one was caused by an asteroid. And for a
long time people tried to find common
themes in these extinctions, you know,
is there one reason why they happen?
They happen at irregular periods.
Um and no one has found yet, you know,
the key, what causes a mass extinction.
Um but the general sort of
theme of them is that the world changes
in some way faster than evolution can
keep up with, right? So, so it all does
boil down to genetics. Um so if I'm a
you know, a worm or a
plant, I can only keep up with
environmental change by either I have
enough plasticity, you know, I have
enough adaptability. If I if I can't go
here, I go there. If I can't use this
food source, I go that food source. So,
all organisms have a certain amount of
plasticity. Um
but
the other way I adapt by my make a big
adaptation is is is through, you know,
mutations, through genetic through
evolution, right? I evolve. I become a
new creature. And that's, you know,
propelled life throughout the last 3 and
1/2, you know, billion years or so. So,
if things change really fast and I don't
have the plasticity and I can't evolve
fast enough, uh the end is near. That's
that's the end of the line uh for my
species. And what are we humans doing?
Uh we've sort of transcended evolution
in a really really important sense. And
this gets to a lot of the things that
Sid was talking about. We don't wait
around to evolve, right? If we if we
have a new pathogen, when you go to get,
you know, a flu shot, right? That flu
evolved into a new virus, but you got
the vaccine and you skipped that
evolutionary step, right? So, the flu
didn't just kill off everyone who wasn't
immune to it.
We jumped over that. And that's and
that's why we've we've done so well, why
we've extended our own lives, why we're
we're so successful. But the flip side
of that are these massive changes that
we are making to the planet on a on a
geological scale. I'm sure everyone
in this room has heard this concept that
we're in a new geological epoch, the
Anthropocene. An epoch is actually
to a geologist a very small amount of
time. There have been many people who
believe we're in a new geological
period. So, the last we're, you know,
we're in the um
What are we in? The Neogene or something
like that? But we we we may be in a
whole new period of time, a very big
geological divide because we have so
we're changing the planet on such a
scale and such at such a rate and at
such a scale. So, I'm just going to
throw out a couple of the ways we're
doing that. Unfortunately, I could spend
all night talking about how we're doing
that, but I I will not. I will turn this
over to a conversation. We're changing
the climate really fast. We're putting
up CO2 really, really fast into the
atmosphere,
perhaps as fast as, you know, has ever
happened in Earth's history.
um
And when you think about it, it makes
sense. It's really hard to put CO2 into
the air, right? So, all the fossil fuels
that we are burning are just carbon that
a plant absorbed during its lifetime.
The plant died and for complicated
geological reasons didn't decompose, but
became a fossil fuel. That process took
hundreds of millions of years and we are
now digging up those stores of fossil
fuels. We're burning them, let's say, in
a matter of a couple of centuries. So,
that's really, really rapid and if
people weren't here, how could that be
happening? Uh we're acidifying the
oceans. That same CO2 that we're
throwing up into the air that's changing
the climate is changing the chemistry of
the oceans.
Um we are very rapidly altering the
surface of the earth when we go in, you
know, to the Amazon or or you know, when
people came to the US and mowed down the
prairies and planted corn. That's a
monoculture. That's a place where very,
very few um creatures can survive.
Everyone's heard about, you know,
monarchs are crashing monarch butterfly
populations. That's because, you know,
we go in to what was used to be their
habitat. We just mow it down, put down
herbicides, plant corn and there's just
nothing for them to eat. It's as simple
as that. Um other ways, we are moving
things around the world. This one
doesn't get as much attention as it
probably should. Um but, you know, over
the vast span of evolutionary time, uh
you know, the continents have divided.
Um
all the continents used to be squished
together um about 250 million years ago
into a continent called we call Pangea.
Then the continents split apart. The
world as we know it came into being.
Evolutionary lineages have been evolving
separately for tens of millions of years
and then we bring them together, right?
You got a you know, you got a Africa
after someone from Africa comes here. Um
you know, all you got to Asia, vice
versa. We're moving, we're moving goods
around, we're moving people around,
we're moving viruses around, we're
moving fungi around and just to give one
really local example of what happens uh
is people have probably heard of a white
nose syndrome killing bats all across
the US. That was a fungal disease, a
fungus brought over from Europe,
probably totally unwittingly by someone
that's just killed um millions and
millions of bats. So,
often times um when people try to date
when did the anthropocene begin, uh they
use one date, you know, that is used as
a beginning of the use of fossil fuels,
and another is post-war when human
population really, really took off. Um
so, all of these questions of what
what we're going to do, you know, to
enhance our own lives, um unfortunately,
are coming at the expense of all these
other species with whom we share the
planet. And that is I unfortunately have
come to believe a pretty inevitable
conflict cuz there's only there's only a
certain amount of space and there's only
a certain amount of resources uh on
planet Earth. Um and then, just to bring
things full circle, and then I'll hand
it back over to Marcelo, you know,
there's going to be all these questions,
"Well, we killed off this, we killed off
that. Can we bring it back? You know,
can we use its genome? We now are so
sophisticated, uh we can just take uh
you know, people have mapped the genome
of the Neanderthal. Can we Can we
recreate a Neanderthal, right? Just
reprogram a human cell to be a
Neanderthal or an elephant cell to be a
mammoth?" Uh those questions, uh if
we're all around in a technologically
advanced society like today's, uh 100
years from now, which I'm not 100% sure
of, uh
are going to be very, very urgent. Um
and and we'll we'll be debating them
very, very heatedly. So, with that, I'm
going to That's great. Thank you very
much. So, so Elizabeth, so so maybe this
GoPro clone thing is not so bad.
Just get one. Just get one one yourself.
Yeah, you one one of yourself. No kids.
Okay, shrinking population. Yeah.
That's that's Yeah. Well, look, we could
we could combine forces. Yeah. Exactly.
Exactly. So, so I think that's great
because you kind of nailed it. There's a
There's a clear tension between these
two narratives here, right? If on on the
one hand, there is science as the
conqueror of all maladies, including
death, view viewed perhaps as a disease
that can be cured in some way, right?
And let's do that. And and I have a
somewhat very visceral version to to
scientism, the idea that science
actually has answers to all questions
cuz it does not, for sure. Uh
and and it's highly debatable, I think,
if death is something that we can really
deal with for many reasons, even
invoking physics and the second law of
thermodynamics. I mean, in sense of
every time you
solve a problem, every time you kill one
of the killers, other killers show up,
right? I mean, this has been you you are
one of the
best historians of medicine around, and
you know this is true. And the question
is, can we ever can this
ever end, you know, is this just part of
the way life manifests itself, right?
But there is this idea that science has
the here. And then, on the other hand,
as you said, you know, there is the
other narrative, which is destruction.
You know, we as a species, in order to
be so many, and in order to live well,
you know, the first thing we need is
energy, is environment, and that
obviously has a tremendous cost, right?
And
to me, and this is a question I have for
both of you, you know, it's because I
have no idea how to answer that. When
you talk to people about these things,
and I'm sure you both have, I mean,
Elizabeth, when you talk about the sixth
extinction, and you put data in front of
people, and and and you discuss this
with educated people, and they
understand it,
but they don't change.
Why not?
To me, that's mind-boggling.
Well, I think when you
Unfortunately, the more, you know, you
you
You know, I I One thing I want to say,
too, is that is that this is not maybe
not really an answer, but um you know,
people have been at this project for for
a really long time, this overcoming of
evolution. And I I I think there's, you
know,
it would be called debated but most I
think scientists once again I'm going to
defer to scientists would say, you know,
humans did in the mega fauna. The mega
fauna extinction was really early on so
humans arrived, you know, in Australia
50 or even 60,000 years ago. There was a
huge wave of extinction of large
animals. They arrived in in in North
America, you know, probably
15, 20,000 years ago. There was a big
wave of extinctions. We no longer have,
you know, mammoths or mastodons running
around New York though we have plenty of
skeletons of them.
Um
So, you know, it's not something
that um you know, it's it's a it's a
project I I think unfortunately we we've
been at a long time and it's just that
our tools have gotten a lot better and
now when we we when you think about the
pace of change right now, right? Your
iPhone, your you know, everything has
been
collected from somewhere on the planet
and has had an impact somewhere on the
planet. And so, you know, the changes
that are required when you have 7.6
billion people on the planet, even if
you just said everyone is simply going
to you know, needs to eat. That's basic
requirement is sort of basic human
rights. And these things come into, you
know, really serious conflict pretty
pretty quickly. Now, if you said, let's
do our best, our absolute best. We would
like everyone on the earth, you know, to
have a decent life and we would like we
would still like to preserve as much of
the rest of the planet as possible. Um
sort of the best proposal I've seen for
that uh is is comes from E.O. Wilson and
he has a a book called Half Earth that
we should sort of put aside half of the
of the land surface of the earth
uh aside for other creatures. And I
think that's a really important uh idea.
Um but it turns out, you know, a
multinational project like that, it's
really really hard to even get it talked
about. Of course.
Yeah.
Yeah, I
I think it's something to do with the
amount of pressure that people respond
to at the individual level, you know,
and and unless there is enough pressure,
the threshold
you you haven't gotten to that threshold
yet and you will not do anything. You
won't take shorter showers, you won't
you know,
eat less meat, whatever it is, even if
you know that there is a cost to all of
that. And and it's an interesting
reflection to understand what will it
take for people to do something at the
not at the governmental level, but at
the individual level because
um
we have power as customers and I think
there is a whole emerging idea of
corporate ethics now where some
corporations are beginning to understand
that, "Hey, if you don't like a company,
you stop buying their products and they
have to change."
And so, you know, you have uh some
companies that you wouldn't expect
getting organic products out there and
stuff like that. But
it's just a reflection that I think we
should we should have um
And you know, in this conversation, you
can always interrupt and ask questions
to one another, too. I don't want to
monopolize. I have a a ton of things I
would like to ask you both. Um okay,
I'll ask uh I'll ask you and I'll say
something about
the dis- discussion about the ethics of
gene manipulation.
You know, where are we with that
conversation?
So, um
well, let's talk about the technology
first and then let's talk a little bit
about the ethics of of genetic
manipulation. Again, the
the background is this is this reading
and writing paradigm. So, remember, we
are now becoming progressively,
particularly with computational
um powers, becoming progressively able
to read,
um make sense of this encyclopedia, 66
volumes of the encyclopedia.
And then comes the question of writing.
And for a long time, as many of you
know, the writing piece of it, changing
the human genome perspective, which
would be essentially saying go to page
and change erase the word
uh
you know
ACGT
ACGT and change it into CCGT
and that might mean changing a gene like
a mutation in the breast cancer causing
BRCA1 gene and making it the non breast
cancer causing
so called normal variant or the wild
type variant. Um
So, that was it was that that project
was very badly stuck for
for very good reason. So, the and the
the reasons are very deep and and
biologically very deep.
So, the biologically they're deep
because as you can imagine
um anytime you take information away
from any genome um is is is a cellular
crisis. Cells are are extraordinarily
sensitive
to their genomes being tampered for a
good reason because they
when that happens the consequences are
usually quite severe. Cancer is one of
the major consequences that a mutation
that eventually causes cancer. So, cells
we now know we're now knowing more and
more so we've discovered some of this in
our lab and other labs have many many
labs have been have been working on
this. Cells are extraordinarily
sensitive to these kinds of changes
and in general they were very hard to
deliver.
The the the wormhole and again this goes
back to
taking control of evolution, rapid
control of evolution. The wormhole came
from a very unusual place and it was not
expected. The wormhole came from
bacteria my the microbial world and and
it came because of evolution.
It came because in the microbial world
the resources are often so restrictive
and there's a constant cat and mouse
game between microbes to compete and
with each other. So, in the microbial
world, what what happened um
many many many many years ago is that um
some bacteria began to be invaded by
viruses.
Um we've reconstructed all of this, by
the way. We don't know if this was this
is true. It's mostly reconstructed.
Bacteria became began to be invaded by
viruses. Viruses are um
parasites. You can think about them they
use the bacterial cell to make more
copies of themselves. They're not living
in this in the traditional sense. They
they parasitize the vi- the bacteria's
body, this genetic apparatus, etc. to
make more copies of itself. That's what
a virus is.
So, bacte- So, we knew all this, but
what we began to understand is that
bacteria have a counter evolution
mechanism.
And they evolved a mechanism basically
to detect the DNA of the virus and make
a cut in it.
Uh chop it up. Um and the field sat
there for a long time. Uh this idea that
scientists began to recognize that some
bacteria um would could have a
recognition sequence. They could
recognize a virus sequence. And deliver
in a a a directed chop, not to any other
part of their own genome. That was
protected. It was specific for a
sequence. And I'm going to rephrase
exactly what I said. In other words, the
bacteria could recognize ACTCCGTTTT
and chop that section. ACTGCGTTTT.
Obviously, if you think a little bit
ahead, you could say to yourself, "Well,
if the vir- if the bacteria can do that,
what if I reengineered the bacteria, put
it into a human cell, and now said,
'Instead of going and chopping the
virus, why don't you go chop the human
genome?'"
ACT
as far as the bacterial apparatus is
concerned, it can't tell whether it's a
virus or a human genome. It has no
fundamental mechanism to tell. And in
fact, that's what has happened. In the
last 5 years, we have co-opted this
bacterial immune system, which is an
antiviral system, um to chop up or to be
directly go to page 66 in the
encyclopedia Britannica of humans of and
and go and make a directed change uh in
in the human genome genetic material.
Now,
human cells haven't given up. They are
still protesting. They're saying, "No,
no, no, wait a second. I'm not ready."
Um and sometimes they shut themselves
down. So, we're now but but but the
technology is extraordinarily simple. Um
because you know,
I could tell you that it would take a
postdoc in my laboratory to make a
directed genetic change in a human stem
cell.
It would take on the order of weeks to
months. It now takes 2 days. Uh and
virtually all of them work. And this is
CRISPR.
This is CRISPR, yes.
But I I I I I have a I have a question,
so but once you're once I had a an
infant or
adult, right? I I can't change all of
their cells, right? So, I have to go at
the moment of conception in there?
So, there three So, that's and that that
this is this is very important question.
So, there three kinds of changes
um and and we should know about all
three of them. So, one of them it is
making changes in all other organisms.
So, this is making using CRISPR to make
modified crops, modified animals, etc.
etc. There you would change, presumably,
the sperm and eggs. Actually, you won't
to change the sperm and eggs. You would
change the stem cells that make sperm
and eggs. Um and the the big debate
there with Now, we're coming back to
your essential question. The big ethical
debate there is the debate about
diversity, biosafety. That's the central
debate and this, of course, goes very
much into what things that you think a
lot about, Elizabeth.
The second one, the second arena,
broader arena, is making changes in
human cells, but not in sperm and eggs,
as long as they're non-sperm and eggs.
So, like blood-forming stem cells, like
stem cells that make pancreas, the stem
cells that make skin, etc. I'm using the
word stem cells because you make the
change and you let the cells propagate
the change in the body. So, there the
big safety is concerns about
possible consequences in the person that
this that receives the receives the
cells, the biggest one of them being
cancer. Cancer, cancer, cancer, cancer,
cancer, basically.
That the second number two, and number
one and number two are already being
done. We will find the first
CRISPR-based therapies
in the next We are working on them
ourselves actively. We will find them in
the next 5 years.
Changing human stem cells using
CRISPR-like technologies is here.
Um it is now yesterday's news as far as
science is concerned. The human
experiment needs to be done. We don't
think that it will be
they will cause cancer in the sense that
people are worried about. Maybe there'll
be some Uh so so this is a very active
area, lots of debate around this. The
third one, which is the most obviously
the most challenging one, the one that's
most debated,
is um making changes in sperm and eggs,
uh or rather stem cells that make sperm
and eggs.
And if you take that, the third uh
arena,
um
this is different from all the other two
because this change is permanently
heritable through the human genome. That
This is a prospective change.
Technologically, there's no fundamental
reason it cannot be done.
Um
and the most surprising piece, and then
we I'll stop, the most surprising piece
that's emerged in the last 3 years, at
least to me, is that we had thought that
uh uh you know, big groups were put
together, National Academy and National
Institute was put together, a
conference. We had thought that they
would say absolutely not for human
genetic change. In fact, what they said
is for diseases that have extraordinary
suffering
in humans,
um that we should be allowed to explore
this arena for human beings. Um, that
was the first recommendation. This will
change. This is an evolving
conversation. But, that was a big line
in the sand that we have just about we
are going to be able to cross. We're
going to say that for diseases that
cause extraordinary human suffering,
uh, potentially a gene like APOE, we
should be able to, um, we should be able
to make a prospective genetic change in
human sperm and eggs.
Um,
this is a wide debate. This is not going
to close tomorrow. Um,
but, uh, that's where the that's where
we're sitting right now.
It's interesting that this is, I think,
the 200th anniversary of the publication
of Frankenstein. Uh-huh.
Which was a cautionary tale precisely
about, you know, how far science can go
without messing things up big time,
right? Because, you know, everybody
watches the movie, but if you read the
novel,
and I can't see you right now, but I
wonder how many would raise their hand
saying, "Did you read the novel, you
know?" And the novel is about the
monster not being like Mr. A B Normal in
the brain, but actually being a genius,
having the the the brain of a genius,
and begging the the doctor, Victor
Frankenstein, for a companion, a female
companion. And then, when the doctor
realizes that his experiment first
worked and second could create a a race
of of of
monsters which are much more powerful,
stronger, and brighter than humans, he
panics. And hence comes the drama.
So, you know, it's a it The reason why I
bring this up is first because it's you
have to in a night like this, but also
because
imagine that we get there, right? That
we can do this. And, you know, you can
put as much legislation as you want, you
know, in scientific practice, but it's a
bit of a Pandora's Box, you know? Once a
scientific idea is out in the world, you
just can't put it back in. And there
will be groups that will be doing it for
the wrong reasons.
Right? And some groups will be doing it
because they can pay to do it. And so,
you know, because the therapies may be
very expensive, and so you start having
a sort of uh
unevenness in society of those that can
take advantage of that and have their
kids be super smart, super beautiful,
super etc. You know, and those that
can't. And you go into the Brave New
World scenario. Yeah, there's but just
to just to temper some of that. I mean,
you know, there It's temperamental. It's
there are many
I mean, just to temper it very clearly.
You know, as I said, there are there is
a substantial camp of people who
correctly believe that tempering with
human and animal genomes is going to be
fundamentally restricted by the fact
that typical traits that we want to
influence
are are run through tens of thousands of
loci in the human genome. And changing
so and you can't you basically you
cannot use CRISPR in that sense. You
can't tell CRISPR You get into a
numerical problem. You can't tell CRISPR
to change tens of thousands of you know,
CRISPR evolved, as I said,
uh to make very directed changes in very
directed loci in the human genome. Now,
there is a smaller other camp that says
that's not true. It says that sure,
there could be tens of thousands of
variations in the human genome that
influence a single trait, but somewhere
along there either that you could create
a synthetic gene Yeah. completely
outside
a biological known by biology or there
is a natural gene variant which will
override all of this we we talk about
overriding genes. And we've seen
examples of I'll give you one great
example of that. Height is controlled by
tens of thousands of loci, maybe
hundreds of thousands of loci across the
human genome, and yet one gene, like the
Marfan syndrome gene
can override all of many of these and
cause extreme extreme changes in human
height. Uh
I can give you several other examples
examples of this.
These this second camp
um
believes that that there'll be more
examples of that. And in fact, the most
perhaps the most challenging example is
that in animal studies, we now know that
maze-solving cognitive abilities of
animals
very poor measure ultimately, but but
some things capture some cognitive
ability of an animal. Again, controlled
by tens of thousands of genes. Um and
yet, actually only a couple by
influencing two or three of them, you
can get a maze-solving animal genius.
Um so, if you now translate that into
the human world, you all of a sudden get
So, so so let me just to temper a little
bit. There are camps out there. I would
say the latter camp is a minority. The
former camp that believes complex human
variation is going to be tough to tackle
using these mechanisms is a majority.
But but maybe Elizabeth, I'll ask you a
question about that. What do you think
about um
bringing back um biodiversity using
these
uh new metrics or new Are you
enthusiastic about that or are you
yeah. Well, all it's like all roads lead
to George Church, um who has spoken
Harvard geneticist who has spoken about
bringing back a mammoth, you know, that
that actually um
uh Asian elephants and mammoths are
quite closely related. Um more closely,
I believe, than African and Asian
elephants. And um
and that we could just, you know, trick,
you know, we could re- rejigger an Asian
elephant again and get a mammoth. Um
You know, I think that there are a bunch
of things to be said for that. Besides,
you know, let's let's just assume for a
moment that we could overcome the
hurdles, which are great, because as
soon as an animal is extinct and dead,
it recreating its genome becomes, you
know, extremely difficult. But let's say
we have an animal uh we
are driving it to the edge of
extinction. We take a live animal. We
just, you know, sequence its DNA, pretty
easy to do right now. Uh bank it. Uh and
then we decide let's let's bring it you
know, let's bring this animal
back.
There's a lot of questions you have to
ask. One is um
you know, why did it go extinct in the
first place, you know? So, you're not
going to you know, you're not going to
be able to a lot of animals if you've
been being done in by a disease, if it's
being done in by an you know, a
predator, an invasive predator for
example, you put them back out there,
you're just going to have the same
problem all over again. So, you got to
deal with that. Um but I think a more
profound question, and this actually
gets back to your clone with a GoPro um
is what is what is identity, right? So,
you know, there's a case right now, and
this is not a this is not sci-fi at all.
It's a very simple case of of um
conservation biology where they had a
species of of the Hawaiian crow,
um very got down to really really low
numbers. It's a distinctive species from
our crow here in the continental US.
Um considered sacred by native
Hawaiians, down to like 20 birds. They
did all sorts of things. Set up a
breeding facility, you double clutch
birds, you take the the
eggs, the birds will lay another egg, uh
you raise the bird by you know, heat or
raise the bird, blah blah blah. You can
do all these things. They brought it
back to a point of having maybe 150
birds. Just recently put some of them
back out in this forest, which they very
carefully, you know, tried to get rid of
predators, blah blah blah. And it's
killed their the first ones were killed
by hawks because they didn't know how to
defend themselves from hawks. They
hadn't been trained. So, you know, an
animal is not just a collection of
genes. It's a it's a it's a We know more
we learn, and there's a lot of culture.
Crow needed a GoPro. Exactly.
The crow Well, there you have it.
Parent crow needed a GoPro to transmit
to its Exactly. But I'm thinking about
my clone. Doesn't want to watch my
memories. It's not interested in my
memories and I actually I actually have
clones. I have identical twins. I have
clones and I always wanted them to write
about I am a clone, but they never
wanted to do it. Um
but they're actually very different
people. They've had very similar
experiences and they have, you know,
identical genetics, not epigenetics
perhaps, but identical underlying
genetics and they're still very
different people. So, I'm not sure I see
the point of all that.
Yeah, well
That was not a question.
Well, I know because to to a very high
extent we are defined by our memories.
You know, and and the clone may look
like you, but it's just a thing, you
know, it's not you anymore. And of
course, if you go talk to real
transhumanists, they're going to say,
"No problem. In the future, we're going
to be able to store the essence of your
consciousness in a digital program and
as long as you back it up, you're going
to keep having it. So, you can always
reimplant it in the brain of your
clone." Now, this is what I was saying,
this is this is my soft version of it.
This is exactly. So, the this is GoPro
Plus.
Exactly. Anyways, we we have to move on
because we have to
have some questions here from the
audience. Here it goes. So,
so how was that I think that's for you,
Sid. How was in vitro fertilization
perceived at its advent? Do you
anticipate that using CRISPR to modify
embryos will eventually become as
acceptable to society as IVF is now?
Um so, that's an important question. So,
um you know, when in vitro fertilization
was first conceived, it was conceived as
a mechanism to get over uh
a terrible uh burden, which was
infertility and the capacity, uh you
know, people's desire to have children.
That was That was the original driver
um
for that. And so, um
what's interesting about it, um as as as
you very well know is that it moved from
and it has remained very much in that
arena. Um
but it also enables it becomes also
enabling technology even though it
wasn't this is a this is I'm trying to
make a general principle out of this
which is that although it was invented
for the purposes of solving
an illness
it became enabling technology has become
enabling technology for prospective
genetic change that may not have to do
with illness.
Um and so the and by that I mean that
because the
because the egg is outside the the human
body
you can do things that you couldn't do
in the human body
including things that I just talked
about before you could do selections for
for different and and that interestingly
has nothing to do with CRISPR right so
that has to only has to do with reading
the genome so if you can read the
individual genomes of in vitro
fertilized
embryos you can select one versus the
other
and in fact many of the proponents of
many of the people who worked or think
about genetic change say that as far as
constraining the field of human genetic
or genomic changes
that's enough that's sufficient that you
can
unless you want to make changes that are
introduced into the human genome things
that are entirely foreign to the human
genome you don't need to do very much
you can by by embryonic selection you
can achieve virtually anything that the
CRISPR mandate of extraordinary
suffering has to do you should you can
remove any forms of extraordinary
suffering
given again given constraints just by
that technology alone.
Okay Elizabeth so
so how optimistic or pessimistic are you
with respect to the future of humanity
in a planet that is changing so fast.
Well,
I mean, I think that humans,
you know, precisely, one one of the
complexities here is that we are so
so adaptable and so clever and such
great tool
manufacturers that we
are, you know, thinking of,
you know, mucking around with the
genetics of of everything on Earth, or
just to name, you know, one of an
infinite number of examples. Um
So, you know, optimistic, pessimistic, I
think it really gets into, you know, are
we going to do ourselves in?
You know, quite possibly, you know,
we've had the capacity to do that ever
since, you know, Robert Oppenheimer
said, you know, I am
death, the destroyer, whatever, you
know, so that's now we're going on,
uh you know, over over more than 70
years, right, one of the first Trinity
test. Um
So, you know, and that's not a very long
time in the history of the planet to
have the capacity to destroy the planet.
So, the fact that we haven't done it yet
doesn't make me that wildly optimistic.
Um
But But but it's the most Yes. Yes.
There's a kind of
There's a moral syndrome that's building
around not tampering with human genomes.
Um
It's not clear to me that there should
be a moral syndrome around not tampering
with genomes.
No, I'm I'm not I'm not really not
arguing What What's the morale What What
Why should we not I mean, you know, I I
can
Why shouldn't we tamper with the genome?
of of every Again, I mean, talk I mean,
again, this Remember this argument came
with and I talk I'm I'm talking about
genomes in general. Remember this
argument came before a panel the the the
the CRISPR argument came before a panel
and it was
you know, the most vociferous people who
argued at the panel were patient
advocates, people whose children are
affected with terrifying diseases, women
with
Uh so so I just want to be just again
just to just to sound a note that yes it
sounds hard you know we'll destroy the
environment etc. etc. etc. but there is
there is also on the other hand I mean
you know we I think I think it we we
it's it's
it's fair to say that scientists aren't
doing this because we are
fundamentally Frankensteinian, you know?
No I I I did not want to accuse you
personally
but and I didn't want to accuse
scientists in general and I think you
know look we we are all eating GMOs you
know everyday whether we whether we want
to or not and it's feeding a lot of the
world and I I'm not a
I I'm simply saying that we
do have so many capacities to change the
world on such a fundamental level and
that's from the macro level of you know
blowing ourselves to smithereens um and
changing the atmosphere and changing the
chemistry of the oceans uh to the micro
level that all I sort of feel like all
bets are off. I don't know where this is
going.
you be would it would it would it be
more I I mean I could tell you I would
be satisfied but would you be happier
uh because the because the debate uh for
GMOs I can give you the GMO debate. It's
not a GMO versus you know go and shop in
Whole Foods debate, right?
Right. Yep. The the the debate for GMOs
across the world is either GMO versus
CMO chemically modified organisms which
we've been using for the last spraying
insecticides putting which dumps twice
as much toxins in the oceans etc. That's
the reality. Well I I I have I'm going
to push back on that cuz a lot of GMOs
are modified so we can put more
chemicals on them. So that's a whole
other thing.
enough.
So so here's here's my question to you.
I mean is it do you think it's a it's a
complete pipe dream that we would so you
going back to E.O. Wilson is a complete
pipe dream that we would have we have
hungry mouths to feed we whether we
could feed half of India without the
high yielding varieties of rice is a
question or wheat is a question mark. I
mean should we What's the other option?
What's the middle road? Is the middle
road that we make seed banks and or is
there no middle road? Are we Are we
doomed down this road? Should we do
Should we be crispering things so that
we restrain ourselves? I mean, that
that's also a possibility, right? We
could use CRISPR as a police. Um we
could be restraining ourselves in a
variety of ways. I actually went to
visit one of the seed banks. There There
are many now. Um
Is there a middle road? Are we Are we
you know, once we're driving down this
road, it ends with
monoculture and and or with with people,
you know,
not being able to shop at at Whole
Paycheck for their
Well, I I think all these things pre all
that question I I think
you know, once again, you're you're like
one one human, you know, one humanities
majors opinion, which is is as to be
honest not worth that much, but I will
offer it since I'm sitting up here. Um
You know, you're you're All these things
are presupposing a kind of orderliness
to the world. Is there a middle ground?
Could we, you know, use genetic
modification to come up with some
really, you know, great crops, intensely
farm certain areas of the world, leave
other areas of the world unfarmed, and,
you know, get through to a moment when
population starts to fall and blah blah
blah. You know, in theory, yes. Now,
look at all the chaos of the world
today. We were having a conversation at
dinner about what's going to happen in
Brazil. We all know what's happening in
the USA. We can go down the list and
say, "Okay, is that going to happen?"
So, I I bring to this um
you know,
not a very high level of um
you know, just I think an ordinary
American's level of skepticism about you
know,
we have to decide to do things. We
cannot decide as a world that we should
reduce carbon emissions, okay? Nothing
could be simpler. That is the simplest,
you know, step. We have to reduce carbon
emissions. That's like step one. We have
technologies, or simple ones, they're
called, you know, windmills and solar
cells, to start to make a dent in this
problem, and we are not doing it. So,
the idea that we're going to come up
with some great construct, and, you
know, yes, it's theoretically possible.
Do I think it's going to happen? I'm
extremely skeptical.
Yeah, I think that makes a lot of sense.
Um
Okay, somebody says something like um
a question, changing subjects a little
bit. A question for Sid, what about a
fourth scenario? We're already immortal,
perhaps life is truly eternal, but in a
different form. Not sure I understand
the question very well. Perhaps you mean
that
life just reinvents itself as time goes
by, like the theory of evolution? I
don't know what I have no clue.
Okay.
Um
there's another one which is
Maybe it was a spiritual question. Yes.
Maybe. Yes. Uh possibly.
so, too. Yes. Well, but you know, so
Here is a comment about this whole
transhumanist um
uh idea, which is if you really take it
to the extreme, you know, the real
extreme transhumanism is to get rid of
the flesh altogether. It's to become
information, information that can
basically just keep going from machine
to machine, or eventually not even in
any machine altogether. So, isn't this
just uh reinventing
the soul?
Right? In in modern technological terms,
right? Because you just get rid of the
flesh. The flesh is a problem. Look at
all this mess we have to do, right? Cut
genes here and all that stuff to try to
get to And uh and if you get rid of it,
all you have is information. If that's
really true, then here we are. We just
transport ourselves
immaterially across time.
So, there is a huge religious component
at the core of this transhumanist
movement. Lots of scientists don't
obviously think like that,
but I think it's there for a lot of
people that actually believe in it and
want to feel it. Now, something more for
you guys. Um well, I I I also wrote
books, but as authors of books, you are
you are immortal.
Your books, your words now live forever.
How do you feel about it?
I won't answer that. That's for you
guys.
Mhm.
Go ahead. I mean, I wish I had not put
the word with
in uh page 66 of
I'm just making it up. Um well, I don't
know, Elizabeth, what what what do you
what do you feel?
let's put it another way.
Why do you feel compelled to write
books?
Wow.
Um
I'm not sure. Do you feel compelled to
write books? It's It's It's kind of a
torment to write books. And um
you know, when you know, you write a
book I I would you know, for myself, I
write a book, there's a certain
satisfaction when you're done after the
torment, and and you are hoping to put
something out into the world in a
package, you know, um that you hope that
people
uh
that will you know, make them think
think differently. I guess that's what
what I hope for, and I'm I'm sure also
to certain Thomas hopes for, and you
know, as for immortality,
you know, to me, you know,
I I I look around, I live in a college
town, I look around the infinite number
of books that have been sitting there
and not taken out for generations. Uh
so, I'm not sure that that's really a
good a good way to achieve immortality,
has it?
That's good.
In my case, I
I have a very simple formula or a
thought about why why to write anything.
Um
Uh I think uh everything
um should
uh raise a question or or or ask a
question. Um my two books are
well, three books, but two two two the
bigger books are are very much directed
by individual questions. The first book,
The Emperor of All Maladies, came about
um because a patient asked me a
question. She said um
I was giving her chemotherapy and she
said, "Where are we going with all of
this?" And you can take that question at
face value or you can ask the question,
"Where are we going?" I mean, this is a
an illness that is
you know, redefined. Cancer has
redefined our relationship to disease so
much so that uh we no longer use
um society to
uh as a lens to view cancer. We use
cancer as a lens to view society. Um
that much influence on our perception of
ourselves, our perception of our future,
and perception of our mortality.
Um
and yet we had no history, no road map
for that. Um
uh in The Gene, I raise a a question
about who are we? Um and what are the
limits of and how what we change? Um
so so and and I think in general,
that's been my approach to this. A a
book I think is successful. I mean, Liz
Abbott's book, which I devoured by the
way,
um Six Extinction asks a again asks a
question. It's a It's a book that raises
a question and tries to offer an answer
to a question. Those to me are fun. And
even fiction
does that. I mean, my my wife's a
sculptor. Um whenever I come up to a
sculpture, I say to her, "Well, what I
mean, she asks me once in a while I'll
go to the studio and she'll say, "Well,
tell me about what do you think about
this work?" And I'll say, "The first
thing I'll always say is what question
is this piece trying to answer? Um What
question is this painting trying to
answer? Every painting, every thing in
my lens, may not be your lens, but in my
lens is about what question is this
trying to solve? What is it trying to
solve? What is it trying to raise? Um
and it it's it's a one way of viewing
the world. It's a way of viewing the
world in which everything is driven by a
series of questions. Yeah.
So, in the end of the day, I I we're
meaning-seeking creatures. And we do the
things we do because we we have the urge
to to engage with these, right? Right.
And and that's what makes you not
completely whole, but at least more
whole.
Right?
Okay, so there's one last question that
I wanted and then we'll we'll close.
Um
on soft immortality in some sense we're
already living it. And I this is the
numbers here. I don't know. 50 billion
cells from your body die every year. Is
that correct? 50 billion? It's 52, but
okay.
Um
our bodies days ago are different from
today's.
Um
and that's an interesting question,
right? What how how Where is the
is the this is the Delphic boat
question, right? The the famous
the famous conundrum which has been
raised many times by philosophers since
a long time. If you have a boat and you
replace every plank in the boat, is the
boat still the boat? Uh this actually is
a question that has very much to do with
things that you are thinking about, too.
The question you raised about identity.
If you recreate the planet and
repopulate it with everything that we
ever saw,
um would it be the same planet? Would it
be the same plan?
Right.
Uh
and there are this is a very fundamental
philosophical question.
Um
I'm not sure I have a uh
a single kind of answer to that, but but
the point is that the
the fundamental difference um
is the difference in autonomy.
So
and
again, this goes into some
some things that we've been thinking
about as as biologists for a while. Why
is the body a body?
Um it's a Delphic boat question. If your
cells are being replaced all the time um
why is the human body a single body? Uh
it's it's a Delphic boat. Um
where the the question begins to become
interesting is your body remains a body
because it has autonomy. It is servicing
yourself. It is it is in service of
something. When you necessarily create a
clone, and this again, there are many
parallels to the planet here.
When you make a clone, that clone
assumes autonomy of itself. If there was
a war between you and your clone,
the clone would side for itself.
And and it would say, go take your GoPro
memories and I'll tell you where to put
them.
And this may indeed be the case. If we
want to do this version of immortality
or this version, even if we take
transhumanism to the nth extent as
information
movement, what is what is what is there
not to say that at the third generation,
this machine will say, I'm not
interested in your
memories.
Go take your memories. I want my new
ones.
And we would end up being right back to
ironically where we are now. When our
children say, I'll tell you what to do
with
with with your recommendation to read
War and Peace, Daddy.
So so so there is of course these are I
mean obviously these are deeper
questions, but they go back not the
metaphors
extend across human beings into into
into planets and ecosystems as well.
Okay, well, just one last thing that I
wanted to say that you can be sure that
given modern astronomy, there's only one
planet Earth in the whole universe.
There may be other planets that could be
somewhat similar, but no planet will
have the same history as our planet. So
this is the only Earth that exists. And
furthermore, there are no other humans
in the whole universe. There may be
humanoids out there, who knows. We have
no clue, but there is only one species
like our own because we are the product
of the history a very specific
contingent history of our planet. So we
are very special in the end of the day
us and the planet. So let's do something
to protect it. Thank you.